They kindly take me under their wings once a year.
They send me back to the hitherlands of New Hampshire, supposedly feeling a little better from this fresh mountain air.
What I neglect to tell them is that we actually have fresh mountain air.
It's just that we have to wait for it to rain a little more frequently because we get all that acid stuff from in the Midwest, but it's good to be here.
and I'm really pleased to be here.
So picture this.
I'm on the third floor, Scram, a bookstore, New York City.
And I'm thinking to myself, what a place.
This is the store that's been around in New York forever.
It's the store that's built
Tremendous collections.
It's the store that authors who we revere today, Faulkner, Hemingway, Annis Ninn, have always have walked through those aisles.
I'm talking with Marvin, the bookseller, the book buyer of 30 years for the Strand, and he's installing the great virtues of this store, and I'm just enthralled.
I leave Marvin, and I go downstairs into the bowels
of the Strand, which is really where the experience of the Strand happens.
And I'm walking around, and all of a sudden I hear this voice.
I can't see anybody, but I hear this voice.
It's here.
I know it's here.
I've got to find it.
It's here.
So I'm now curious.
And I start trying to find the voice and I start chasing it through the aisles and I'm going from travel to a dramatic attack.
And about the fourth aisle I catch up with it and I run around the corner and all of a sudden I literally bump into Nicholas Vansman.
And I said, Nicholas, what are you doing here?
And he kind of
At first, he's trying to be polite, but you know in his eyes he's got this goal, this mission.
He gives me a hello, but he's off in another world.
And I said, what is it?
It's here.
I know it's here.
I've got to find it.
What, what?
And I'm saying, if I can get it for him.
I'm younger.
I can dash up to the second floor, get through the checkout counter, and be lost in a city of 10 million people before he knew what's happened.
And he finally says, it's got to be here.
I says, what, Nicholas?
He says, that unsigned John Dunning novel.
That's good.
I'm out of here.
You see, I'm the non-fiction one.
I have to tell you, it's giving me great pleasure to make that story up.
I started to put it together, I said, I'm not having one of these seen you more.
We did meet at the Strand.
There is a thread of truth to all stories.
And the truth of it is, I did meet Nicholas Baffing last February in the basement of the Strand.
It is true, I was on the third floor talking with Marvin, and I said to Nicholas after we said hello, I said, you know, Nicholas, it would be wonderful to have you and John Dunning on a platform together.
I said, you guys are just great.
I said, I know John, I know you.
I said, you know, you both are opinionated, you've got ideas, you know, something could happen.
And he says, great.
I said,
call John.
Well, John is off on the road, so I write him an email, little did I know, he's on this 10,000 mile book tour from, I think he refers to it as the book tour tour of hell.
And I start emailing him.
So my first email, I kind of try to set it up, and I tell him, you know, Nicholas Batchman really likes your works, he's never had a chance to meet you, he wants to meet you, how about coming to New Hampshire and doing a program?
And I get this short little curse response.
I don't fly.
So I say to myself, all right, let me try again.
So I grovel through a couple more emails.
And John finally writes back to me and says, why don't you guys come out here?
Now, I'm guessing that John's thinking that that's going to finish that story.
But John didn't know that my resources were a little deeper than he might have expected.
And I got through to the committee and to Lois.
and they loved the idea, and now we are here.
And that part is really exciting.
So, why are we here today?
Where's the bar?
Yes, okay, why are we here today?
Well, in a few well-known paraphrased words,
It's the story, stupid.
That's why we're here.
It's the story.
It's the story not just of every book, but the story about every book, about every copy of every book.
It's the story about who wrote it, who owned it, who signed it, who read it, who collected it, how did it get here, why is it different from any other copy or printing?
What's the association?
What's unusual about this copy?
Where did I find it?
What a bargain I got here.
How does it fit into my collection?
These are all the stories we tell when we show our books and talk about our collection.
Well, today we have Nicholas Vassbain, who's written in Gentle Madness, Among the Gently Mad, Patience and Fortitude, in his latest book, Splendors of Letters,
who has done a great service to the book world by collecting stories about book collectors, some of which may have been lost through the ages, were it not for his gift of investigative reporting.
Nicholas writes about the life of the book, and we have John Dunn, who in his
who really doesn't need an introduction.
He writes about the death of the book.
That's not interesting.
He needs no introduction.
You've been reading him since he worked at the Denver Post, his first book, Holland Suggestion, 1972, his Janeway novel, his encyclopedic bedtime book,
on radio shows, in his chapbook, Book Scout, is a personal favorite.
John gives life to the book, expecting that there someday may be apocryphal stories about this event here today.
About these two men, locked, locked, tusk to tusk, in their stories about
The story of Tales from the Trail, it is really a wonderful honor and a privilege to present for your pleasure, Nicholas Badmaine and John Beckham.
We've got to get more money.
Should we go alphabetically or the hometown guy?
You go.
BA, right?
The husband goes first.
Well, I have to tell you, it really is a great thrill and a great honor for me to not only be here at the Rocky Mountain Book Fair.
It's my first trip ever to Denver.
I did come through once on the way to Colorado Springs.
And as a person who really is committed and dedicated to book culture, book people, book places, anything pertaining to and involving books,
from every aspect of it.
I've always felt that one of the great book cities I really had not been to is Denver.
So when this discussion started generating with Richard, he didn't really accost me in the stand, but it was close I got to say.
I'm teasing.
It was very nice to chat with him, but I was kind of selling books.
You know what that's like when you're involved in a transaction?
comes up, and first of all, you're nervous because somebody recognizes you, you know, and I think, my goodness, I have my hat on with my name on the back of it, but anyway, it was a delight to chat with Richard, and he was proposing this thing up in New Hampshire, and I said, yeah, really, do you think John wants to come up to the, I mean, New Hampshire is wonderful, and I'm a lifelong New England guy.
But I said, on the whole, I'm really much rather go out to Denver and visit this great book city and to come to this fair and to really, for me it's kind of like paying homage to a person I have the greatest respect and admiration for, and that is John Dunning.
And now I'm not teething.
Here we are on this same program, Tales of the Trail, and if I am
The Boswell of the book collecting world, which I, it's not bad, I haven't been called that yet, but I'll call it myself.
If I may digress, my wife, but I've mentioned this at the Colorado State yet, and I forget how there's some, how do they introduce me to something of the book world?
The teen, yeah, the teen.
I said, that's a new one, the dean of the book world.
My wife and I went to Chattanooga, Tennessee once, and the local paper said, the king of the bibliophiles.
I said, wow.
And Connie was with me, and she said, he's impossible enough to live with now.
Now he's really going to be insufferable.
And I've also been described as the Johnny Appleseed.
That's kind of fun, because Johnny Appleseed was a New Englander, and he traveled the country, and he sowed the seeds of apples, I guess apples.
I like to think that I go around and just instilling this, if I can share my passion and my enthusiasm for books and for book people, that I'm doing something productive.
But again, really what I am is a reporter.
I am a storyteller first, but a reporter second.
And what I determined early on is that I could never be a great collector.
I could be a great collector if I had vast sums of money and if I were able to purchase the books that I would really like to have, but I knew that would never happen.
but something I could do as a reporter and as a chronicle is collect collectors, and I've been pretty good at that.
And I think those of you who are familiar with Gentle Madness, really one of the purposes of that book was to go out not only and to write about many of the great collectors through history, which is part one, but part two of that book, I thought I could do something which had never, in my view, been done before.
It was to bring my
modest skills of an investigative reporter, a good interviewer, a person who likes to go out and listen and see things and feel things and touch things and to go out and really write about many of the great collectors of today.
And I thought it would be worthwhile not only to identify these people but to try and box the compass as it were, to do it not only geographically but in terms of those who afford to buy it, all levels of activity, and to write a bunch of stories.
It really is storytelling.
It don't mean a thing if it ain't got that swing, is the way I look at it.
If there's not a good story attached to whatever it is I'm trying to describe, then I will find an instance where there is a good story.
But if I'm the Boswell to complete that thought, I do tend to ramble.
This is Homer over here.
I'm the reporter.
And this is the poet.
So it really is, for me, a great, and I told you I was going to use that line, too, and you said, you better not, I'm out of here.
Out of here, you have to forgive me for the accent.
So it really will be a lot of fun to talk a little bit about some tales of, I guess, is it on the trail or from the trail, a book collecting more of people that I've
been able to meet and write about, and I really have covered every aspect, I mean, from one extreme to the other.
Steven Blumberg, those of you who may be familiar with Chapter 13 of Gentle Madness, called the Blumberg Collection, a rather ironic title.
This is the individual who, over a 20-year period, collected 25,000 books, 20-year period.
Conservatively, the value is conservatively estimated at $20 million.
The one question was provenance.
329 libraries in 45 states, two Canadian provinces in the District of Columbia, fully 95% of which were never known to be missing until the day he was arrested in 1990.
Ken Sanders is here in the back of the room, the ADAA security man.
He'll tell you this is probably the most knowledgeable man in the United States on book theft.
Steven Blumberg, I think we can say, is wise.
the most accomplished book thief of the 20th century.
Here I was embarked on writing a book about the wonderful aspects of bibliomania.
The whole premise of A Gentle Madness was so much of what we value of our history, our culture, our literature would be lost forever if it were for book collectors.
I'm looking around for the vacant looks.
I'm not getting them, thankfully, because we are among kindred spirits.
These are book people here, but I have to say that I was a reporter and a journalist and a
book editor, people would say to me, what are you working on?
And I would say, I'm working on a book about book collectors, and I would get this blank book.
And I'd start telling them, and then the next book, of course, Patience and Fortitude, which is a library, and that really got their attention.
And I would tell them, this is very interesting, there's a chapter in there about off-site storage.
Well, that really, that really is brilliant.
I swear I was introduced once at a program as the author of A Gentle Madness and Pride and Prejudice.
And I had to say, look, this is not a lost Jane Austen novel.
Patience and Fortitude are the names of the lions that stand guide in front of the New York Public Library, Fifth Avenue in New York, so named during the years of the Great Depression.
Now, this is the world expert, the world authority on radio.
Mayor LaGuardia used to give these Sunday night broadcasts during the years of the Great Depression, and he would unfailingly conclude his remarks by saying words to the effect, what we need to see us through the great ordeal that lay ahead are to exercise the twin virtues of patience and fortitude.
And prior to that, the lines of Tennessee Pink Marble, which
stand guard outside the public library, named, I think, Lennox and Aster, after James Lennox and John Jacob Aster, who were patrons, early patrons of the library, the names thereafter of Patience and Fortitude.
What a great image and metaphor to choose.
Here we are, these declining years of the 20th century, and
And the whole mission, the future of the library is being debated.
I don't think there's any question that libraries will continue into process, but the role and the function of the printed book, the future of the printed book, I thought this image of Lyon's standing guide at the gates of knowledge worked, although occasionally it is confused what in the world is patience and poetry that has to do with book culture.
But that's where that title comes from.
It's been wonderful, I have to say, traveling the country, going to the trial of Steven Blumberg.
This book was supposed to be about people who preserved culture, preserved literature, preserved history.
I find myself in the middle of Iowa for two weeks in one of the coldest winters on record, attending this trial, where the man's defense, by the way, was not guilty by reason of insanity.
Now, if you have a book titled A Gentle Madness,
And this is the only case, I think, in the history of American jurisprudence where what amounts to a case of criminal bibliomania where the defense is going to be insanity.
I did it because I was crazy.
That is a very appealing concept for me, I have to say, and prompted me to take what was supposed to be an 18-month project and it became an eight-year project, a book that
And it's the first contract that I had with Random House that was supposed to be, the book was supposed to be in about 1990, 1991.
It was supposed to be 95,000 words and the final product eight years later with another publisher, Random House Got Tired of Waiting, was $250 for it.
And I'm going to let John talk a little bit now and if you'd like to hear a little bit more of some of the stories from the trail, I'd be more than happy to pick up on it.
Thank you.
Yes, sir.
This is probably a good deal earthier than your part of the program because I think when we talk about, I've got a couple of Gentle Madness stories, but I came to this in a whole different way.
I was a writer a long time ago.
I had written five books, none of which really made any kind of a splash.
most of which you didn't earn out, as they say in the book trade.
That means that you get an advance and you don't make enough to pay your advance back.
And around 1980, I hit the mother of all dry streaks where I couldn't sell anything.
And my wife and I would walk around the neighborhood and talk about what's going to happen when I click again.
She has amazing optimism.
But there comes a time when you have the weight of rejection.
Now I know what word always felt like when they pile the weight on.
And I came to a point where I said, you know, as much as I love the idea of authorship and authorhood and writing books,
Maybe it's time we did something else.
It's been a long time since I've worked for any kind of living.
So she had been in the foreign service, and she had a little nest egg from that.
And when you live with a bookman or a writer, your money is never safe.
And I generously offered to
take her money and open a bookstore for her.
You remember that Isaac Denison line, I had a farm in Africa, I had a bookstore on East Colt.
What a life, we were there, we were there 10 years, and from the first day, it was like magic.
There's a scene in my book, Book to Die,
where they're building the bookstore, and they're building the shelves.
And book scouts would come in off the street with bags of books.
I didn't make this up.
Book scouts would come in, and they would say, are you buying books?
And I had books all over the floor.
And I said, sure.
And Steve Wilson was a guy down the street, a guy with a long, pointy beard, old ex-hippie.
And he would come up, and he was a carpenter.
He would help me build the shelves.
And Steve would say, don't buy that.
It's a dog.
And don't ever buy a book by a female writer with three names.
And don't buy a book that's, don't ever buy a book written by Jane Fonda or anybody.
who has had a best seller attached to their name because there's 8 million copies in The Naked City and you'll die with it.
On the other hand, if you have a book about the history of teeth in North Denver written by a dentist, North Denver was fairly colorful.
And sometimes there wasn't anything left but teeth.
And so he said, buy that.
That's a $60 book.
And I would say, how do you know that?
And he said, just buy it.
And I would buy it.
And I would say, well, what am I going to sell it for?
He said, $60.
And I said, well, I'll die with this book.
And he said, if you price it any lower than $60, I'll buy it.
And I said, well, I don't want to have that.
So price it at $60, and somebody would come in and buy it.
And Nick was talking about the pet names we collect.
I wasn't thinking of those great philosophers.
I was thinking more of Moe, Larry, and Shemp, and I was Larry.
He was the one who died.
I don't know what Steve and Michael were.
Michael was a guy up the street as well, but they were my mentors.
I started out knowing diddly about books.
I still don't know a lot.
I found out that nobody knows all of it, and you can't
You can be a specialist.
You can be introduced as an expert.
I'm always very queasy when they say that.
So I drove my way along on East Colfax.
Didn't write a word.
I was in danger of never writing again.
Or the world was in danger of never seeing it.
But you know, no matter how discouraged you get, there's something about a writer who isn't writing
And eventually, I wrote again and again.
And I was really rusty when I started this book to die.
And it was based on my stuff on East Colfax.
Books to Book Scouts were real.
People who came in stores were real enough.
I hate to tell you how real some of them were.
And I sent it off to New York to my agent.
And she started sending it around, and nobody wanted it, it seemed.
It went and went and went, and a year passed.
And I looked at my wife one day, and the police were sitting in there on Saturday, and I had just gone to the post office and gotten my latest rejection on it.
And I turned to her and I said, I don't think I want to do this anymore.
I'm going to write to my agent and withdraw the book, and I'm going to be a happy book
seller from now on.
And that gentleman sitting right over there, he and I used to share an office.
The guy in the yellow shirt, Mr. Warwick Downing Esquire, we used to share an office where we were both aging, he was more aging than I was, aspiring to keep it going, writers.
And I went in that day to the office, and I sat down and I said,
I've had it.
I'm sick of this stuff.
He said, well, what does that mean?
And I said, I'm going to call the book back and I'm going to burn it.
And he doesn't remember this.
His memory is much faultier than mine.
But he stood up there on his hind legs and he says, if you can even think of doing that, you're going to have to whip me.
He's a wiry guy, smaller than I am.
But he's sneaky.
And I decided I didn't want to try that, so I sent it out one more time, and my agent wrote back and said, at last I get to make money.
I don't care at this point.
I said, I don't care.
She said, you're not going to get much money, so don't.
And I said, I don't care how much money.
She said, Skridner wants to buy it.
And I said, Skridner?
House of Hemingway.
Wolf, Fitzgerald, me.
And I'm sitting there in my bookstore, and we've got about a $35 day going.
There's a lot of those.
Real booksellers like Ken Sanders back there don't know what it's like to have a day like that.
There's nothing but excitement in that store.
But we had a couple of customers who actually just made my life.
I would start out in the morning, and I would cruise Capitol Hill in my car, and I would just suck these books up like a vacuum.
You can't do this anymore.
People don't put them out.
I know, I get some of the blame for that, but, you know, maybe it's true, maybe it isn't.
I would go along and they would throw out the entire Shelby Foote trilogy on the Civil War for $5.
And I'd buy it and come back.
And we had a couple of
a couple of customers, Bob and Harvey Platts, who were usually there on Saturday, and when I would unload the truck, we would sell books on the street before I even got them in the store.
What do you want for this?
I don't know.
I think that set's worth about $60.
Why can't you do a little better?
Well, you know, I got $5.
$50.
Okay, right out of check.
And when I sold Bookman's Way,
And then when I saw 2 o'clock Eastern wartime, I had, for the first time, a little bit of money.
And we went to New York, and we went to the New York Book Fair.
I know Ken knows what a danger that is to go into the New York Book Fair thinking you have some money in your pocket.
And I told Helen, I said, I want to find out what it's like to buy a good book and actually pay for it.
And I bought a beautiful copy of The Grapes of Wrath, a bookseller we know.
A great guy came up to me and said, I got $7,500 on this.
You can see, look at it.
It's beautiful.
I'll let you have it for five because it's you.
And I wrote up a check and I handed it to him.
And then I bought
a copy of The Long Valley, and then I bought a copy of Mice and Men, and I walked out of there with a $10,000 tariff, and we got back to our hotel in New York, and I looked at her, and I said, what the hell did I just do?
Is this the general madness or what?
That's it.
I don't do too much of that anymore.
But it has been a trip.
It has been a lot of fun trekking through the book world.
And are we going to
keep this up, or are we going to ask questions, answer questions, or are we going to try to answer questions?
Richard, do you want us to answer questions, or do you want us to talk more?
Talk more.
Talk more what?
You should talk more.
Talk more.
What?
Well, I'll finish this story, and then you can have at it.
I'm on deck.
I got back to Denby, and
All that story about my book scout, he used to come to the store, and the description of, I shouldn't say this too loud, I suppose there's still some action that could be taken about this, but he would come into the store, and he would, he was so difficult, he started out as a pussycat.
He just, I had a reference section, and I said, it's open to anybody.
You want to look my books up?
Fine.
When I come in, we'll talk about it.
He was always desperate.
These guys always lived from hand to mouth, you know.
And I would come in and he would say, I think this is a $50 book, which means I would pay him $20 for it if I was going to sell it for $50.
And I'd look at it and I'd say, is this what you found it for?
I used to have these reference books.
These were the great days before the Internet.
The great days when nobody knew what anything was worth.
And he just made it up.
And some guys made it up better than others, and they were the ones that got rich.
And so then they would get in these books called Bookman's Price Index, which I subscribe to.
And we would look them up in there and find out that, hey, this is a $600 book.
Well, if you can sell it, it's a $600 book.
And he would say, I think this is a $100 book.
And I would say, well, you know, there's four others in there that I can get for $20.
And we would argue back.
It became more and more difficult.
And one day I took my hand and I slammed it down on the counter and I said,
I swear to God, I'm going to write a book about the book trade, and I'm going to put you in it, and I'm going to kill you in the first line.
It's just a coincidence that Bobby the Book Scout was killed at midnight.
And he had cats, and he had them.
I went over to his house one time, and we had the string of drop cord.
He didn't have any electricity.
From the next apartment, it was building darkness.
And he had a light bulb and a drop cord.
And I had to look at his books while cats trek through the place, kind of looking at the books.
And I said, are these cats allowed to have their way in here with these books?
And he said, no, no, they are well trained.
And he put on and picked up the book and bummed it.
He was a piece of work.
And we had some fun.
And then I got out of it.
I still miss parts of it.
I realized that I miss what isn't anymore.
The internet came in, and it spawned a whole raft of people who are knowledgeable, but a whole raft of people who, as my friend Jane Wood would say, can't find their butt with both hands and our little telescope.
Some of them are pathetic.
Anyway, it's a different business today than it was one.
I really sound a hundred years old, you know.
And it's only been ten years ago that all this has happened.
Please, start something before I speak again.
Okay, well, it's been ten years for me, too.
Gentle Madness was published in 1995, and I mentioned how it had been under contract to Random House, and they either tired of waiting for it or whatever, but they one day just unceremoniously said, when I'm publishing this book,
And it was amazing how difficult it was, how almost impossible it was, to find a publisher in New York that would want to publish a book about book collectors.
I said, well, you know, they said, who'd read it?
And I said, you know, book collectors, maybe, to start with.
That might work.
And then, of course, I did have this huge book that was 250.
It is.
I mean, it's a four-pound book.
I've never seen anyone read it on an airplane.
I've seen your book, I have to say, people reading any number of John Denny's books.
airplanes.
Not only are they wonderful reads, they're compact.
They don't weigh five pounds, six pounds.
But the day will come when I will see someone carrying a Gentle Madness on an airplane and I'll embrace that person and take a dress and send out a copy of the next book.
Happily, thankfully, a fellow who used to review books for me by the name of Alan Peacock, a young student at Harvard and I was still a book review editor in Worcester, Massachusetts.
At that time was now a senior editor at Henry Holt of New York and heard that Nick was out there desperately trying to find someone who would publish his book.
And Alan was on a roll at that time.
He had had a couple of Pulitzer Prize winners.
He was really the hot shot at Holt.
He said, all right, send us.
He called my agent.
He said, send Nick's book over.
And I'll never forget this day.
I tear up when I think about it.
He'd had it for the longest time.
He was a notorious, really slow reader.
And then one Thanksgiving, it was 1994, 1993, he called the day before Thanksgiving, this is Alan Peacock.
I want you and your family to have a wonderful Thanksgiving tomorrow.
I'm buying your book.
And I well up when I even think about it.
It was really a fabulous day because we had been wandering the wilderness, I think, for a long time.
nine months, 13 months, whatever it was, who in the world is going to publish this book?
He said, there's just one question I have to ask.
And I said, what's that?
He said, what's wrong with it?
You know, because it had been with Random House and they'd sent it back.
Random House was about to publish it.
It had already been listed in the catalog.
But I was an orphan.
Have you ever been an orphan, John, where you had an editor who acquired you and left and went someplace else, and now you don't have anyone being your champion.
So I actually, by the time my second book was published, I had had nine different editors.
Three editors along that.
It's just amazing.
But anyway, Alan published Gentleman.
One of the reasons it's a scarce book today is that they didn't have that much confidence that it would sell.
So the first printing was 5,800 copies, which thankfully sold out within a few days.
We had three printings within the first month of publication in 1995.
It was a pretty interesting run.
But I do have to say we talk about the Internet and how it has changed the book world.
For me, as a collector, certainly it's changed things, but as a journalist, as a writer, and as a chronicler of this book world, it hasn't changed a thing, except that I can now do searches and using LexisNexis or whatever.
But as a person who really wants to go out and get book stories, I still feel that I have to go out and meet the people I'm going to write about.
I have to go out and handle the goods, see the collections.
It's still very much a tactile exercise for me.
That's the only way I know how to write stories.
There's one story I do like to tell.
We talk about a tale from the trail.
I like to tell it.
It's about a collector by the name of William Scheide, who I would suggest is probably the greatest living book collector in the world.
I write about him in Gentle Madness.
He's still quite alive.
He's in his nineties.
He's a third generation collector.
His library is so extraordinary, it is on the campus of Princeton University in Firestone Library in a little room all by itself.
He owns the building.
Princeton is very clever.
They figure that however old the books are, however long Mr. Shaggy lives, the books will last longer.
And at some point, maybe, this has not been disclosed, the books will go to Princeton.
But it still very much remains a private collection, but it's in Firestone Library.
I devoted a whole chapter to Bill Scheide and Gentle Madness because I couldn't see who else you could even put with him in this one chapter.
There are chapters where I write about three or four different collectors.
They're fine.
They work in one chapter.
For Scheide, he had to be alone.
I went to see him a couple of times at the library at Princeton, in the Firestone Library.
There's one moment I'll never forget.
He walked over to this old stand-up safe that had been his grandfather's.
He was in his 80s at that point and he was struggling with the door and lifting up and removing this big clamshell box.
I offered to help him with the box and he very gruffly said, you go sit down over there, I'll be right over.
It was a reading table and I said, yes sir, okay.
I went over, I sat down and he came over, he opened up this box and then revealed to me what I knew instantly was his copy of the Gutenberg Bible.
in its original 15th century binding, one of only two in private hands in the world.
As I say, these are books that I could never hope to own, but what he was doing was opening and revealing to me and inviting me to touch where metal type had hidden into paper for the first time.
Now, I record everything, as you can see, everything that I'm allowed to, and I put it certainly on my interviews.
You can go back to this day and listen to that tape
hear all of a sudden this elderly voice saying, are you okay?
And you will hear me say, forgive me, sir, I am a bit lightheaded.
And I will continue by saying, and I said, it isn't often that I am allowed to touch a person's Gutenberg Bible.
He liked that, and he said that
Oh, Rodgers started it.
Harvard would let you handle his anytime.
And I said, no, Rodgers is a friend of mine, actually.
And he's already said no.
And that Gutenberg Bible is not Rodgers.
It's Harvard's.
This is yours.
And I guess the point is, my wife Connie and I will travel.
Really, we will go anywhere to see a great book.
This was only Princeton.
This was only a couple hundred miles away.
We've traveled to Venice to go to the bibliothèque, the St.
Mark's Library, the Marziana, just really to see the books of Cardinal Busserian.
He was the Greek bishop who fled at the fall of Constantinople in 1453, and he carried out all these wonderful cortices documenting ancient Greek literature.
He was a humanist, actually, and then he converted to the Catholic Church.
It's amazing.
I'm Greek-American, so I can say it's how they will bear a pledge after 500 years.
I went up to Mount Athos for a chapter in Patience and Borgia just to see these books that have been preserved and saved in these monastic libraries for a thousand years.
And one of the monks said to me, well, where have you been?
I said, oh, I went to see Bassarian's books two months ago in Venice.
He said, the traitor.
He was still the traitor because he had converted from...
It's amazing.
But we went to Venice really just to hold and to handle this one 7th century codex.
It's the oldest, the earliest known copy of Homer that has come down to it.
Now, of course, it's not the oldest text, but it's the oldest surviving text.
You have some of these marginalia, these annotations in the margins.
There are references to books that themselves don't even exist anymore.
But here is this, and it's vellum, of course, and you can see where it's been handled
You can just wonder and imagine whose fingers have handled this book.
And that's a kick, traveling.
Of course, Venice is nice.
I mean, my wife said, I'll go to Venice with you and go visit that library.
In February, I traveled to Chicago on a day trip, one day, just to go out and see one book.
There's a chapter in my new book, A Splendor of Letters, where I talk about discards and books that have been deaccessioned, books that are sold off and carved up for their engravings.
I write about the Massachusetts Horticultural Society, which just a year or two ago sold off, which up to that point was arguably the finest collection of horticultural and botanic books in the United States, and to raise $6 million to
their spring flower show and to fix the leaky room and using the excuse that nobody comes to see these books anymore they sold off all of these remarkable books they were saying well most of them will go to collective they'll go to institutional collections they won't be broken up but this very astute librarian at the chicago botanic garden had put out the word among his bookseller friends and he gave them a list of titles if you see any of these books show up cannibalized let me know
He did, he found one book, one of only eight copies in institutional libraries in the world.
You know, we say the Audubon elephant folios, there were 46 copies in institutional libraries.
Exceedingly rare book, but not a particularly scarce book.
I mean, that is a concept that is hard sometimes to impress upon people.
The first folio Shakespeare, were there 250 of those?
There were 80 alone at the Folger Library.
Well, it's not a scarce book, but it certainly is a very rare book.
But this particular book,
It's an 18th century illustrated book on plants, on fruit-bearing trees.
It has to be the title, but it's a long German title, and I think it's the Nuremberg Hesperides of the short form.
Only one copy of New England, and yet the Horticultural Society had sold it for $50,000.
It sold at Christie's, and within months,
The cannibalized copy had shown up in England.
All of the plates, 258 plates, were gone and had been colored, by the way, and they're selling on the internet now for $1,500 each.
But I went to Chicago just to see, to pay my respects to this one book.
I mean, you go to see a beautiful book, but in this instance it was to go and to pay my respects to this book.
And for me, my books, by the way, are never done.
I have to say one thing about writing nonfiction books, even though they have already appeared between hardcovers and they've been published, and while you're still working on the next one, it all remains a work in progress for me.
I'm continually interested in the collectors I write about, the booksellers I meet, the librarians.
I want to know how everyone is doing.
I've never finished with them.
So even though I had written about the Horticultural Society, a blender of letters, and that book was out, I still went to Chicago to see the book.
came back, wrote an op-ed piece for the Boston Globe, timed it to appear a week before the Spring Flower Show in Boston.
And it's on our website.
Take a look.
NicholasBasbane.com.
There's a click down there.
I took a big picture of this book that had just been raped.
I hate to use that verb, but the book had been totally abused.
And there has never been a facsimile published of this book.
So even just getting the text at the Chicago Botanic Garden was important.
There are the wonderful aspects of collecting, but there are also these shameful aspects, and I feel it's my responsibility and my pleasure to talk about them.
I don't know if that has to do with a tale from the trail, but it's one of them.
That's a great tale from the trail.
I love this stuff.
I wish I knew it.
I wish I'd seen it.
I wish I could walk in his shoes for a while and see what he's seen.
But most of my turf is far more common.
The East 17th or whatever the street was, thrift store, where I went in and picked up a copy of the Recognitions by William Gattis, signed copy, for 65 cents.
It's a $400 or $500 book, even then.
And when you do that, it lights up your life.
I don't know, especially when you have rent to pay, which I always had.
I remember finding books that, this is one of my favorite tales from the trail.
This was not long ago.
In fact, I think Lois was there.
We were having a bookseller's lunch out of North Denver.
And we were all sitting around grousing, griping, about how bad it's gotten, about how you can't find anything anymore.
This is what booksellers do.
They gripe.
When I was on the racetrack, racetrackers griped.
When I was at the Denver Post, newspaper people griped.
But booksellers seemed to have their own level of griping.
And we were all, about a dozen of us, sitting around the table talking about how the Internet has dried everything up.
You can't find stuff.
And we headed across North Denver.
Pardon me if some of you have heard this story, but it's one of my favorite stories at the trail.
And we drove past this thrift store where I pulled out lots and lots of books.
I've got a friend, by the way, who's a book dealer of some note, and he says, I know what you do in those places.
He says, I've never been able to find anything in there.
Plus, you go in there and it smells.
It smells like I've used hospitals, you know, mattresses and stuff.
And I said, well, you know.
So I tell him this story.
So we walk in the Trish store, and there's four book scouts, at least.
hanging there like vampires, waiting for the woman to come out and put the books out.
And this particular place has got this fierce woman.
She's got a... I hope she's got hair.
Because if I've ever come close to being afraid of a woman, she is a... She's got a stud through her face.
Face-sealed bolt.
I've never been able to understand that.
And the book scouts would kind of edge close to the tray as she put them out.
And if one of them leaned over a little further, she would say, don't do that.
Don't touch the books until I get them on the shelf.
And boy, move back.
And we got there and we started working this store.
She was just rolling the cart back
safe now.
And we did it fast.
We walked down.
She's looking on one shelf.
I'm looking on the other.
And we get to the end and there's a copy of The Water's Wide by Pat Conroy.
And I crack it like this.
And she said, oh, it's going to be a book club edition.
And I said, no, no, trade edition.
She said, how do you know?
And I said, because the book club edition
And I start giving a seminar right there.
The Book Club edition had dark red paper-covered boards on the spine, paper-covered spine.
The trade edition had cloth on the spine.
And I could look right down inside the dust jacket and see that it was a trade edition.
And I said, there were, however, several printings.
And she said, well, there is a way to find out, but it is.
You could open it up and look.
I'm afraid at this point to open and look, because I know the first printing is really more prolific than the later prints.
It's typical of any other book, including Book to Die.
They did a reasonably small first printing, and then they did smaller additional printings.
So I open it up, then it's a first edition, and I closed it like this, and I said, yes, there is a god.
And I took two books off the shelf and put them on the top of it.
I'm walking along, and
The book scouts, of course, are still there.
This is not at all lost on them.
And one of them comes over to me and says, that was a good one, wasn't it?
And I said, yeah, it actually was pretty good.
And he said, how good was it?
And I said, pretty good.
And I thought, well, you know, if I tell him, he's going to hate me.
But he hates me anyway, so I might as well tell him.
And he said, it's about $1,000.
And he said, and his face turned white.
And he said, I had it in my hand.
I had it in my hand.
I carried it all over the store.
And I thought, Pat Conroy, who cares?
You know, I've got five copies of Beach Music that I can't sell.
And I said, this is not the same animal.
It's just got the same guy's name on it.
There was a 250,000-some printing on that book.
This is a very scarce animal.
So he hates me.
There were a lot of stories like that.
Not quite as much fun as that one.
I think to be a good book scout you also have to have a twist of perversity in your soul.
The agony of defeat.
The thrill of victory.
I found books in thrift stores that paid the rent.
And that's the particular kit when you are trying to scrape it up every month and get it together.
Our tales of the trail are very different.
Richard is lurking.
I know the look of a lurk when I see him.
He looks like one of those book shouts I was telling him.
Hang there like a vampire waiting to pounce on you.
You're not going to forgive me for that story are you John?
That was not you, but it might have been.
A few minutes for questions.
Okay.
back there we'll come here in a second um he's asking about i think my final actually i think you're probably talking about my emily dickinson which is uh i i oh the legends actually that's the jeffrey crayon which is the uh washington that that i really didn't find that had belonged to uh
a kind of a mentor of mine.
And among The Gently Met, I do write about the importance of having a mentor.
I think that because so much of this is not codified and there is so much wisdom to pass on if you can latch on to somebody who is willing to share.
And this was a person who did teach me a lot.
And when he died, his books went off to a little sale above a Kentucky Fried Chicken.
I mean, it was not a big sale.
And there were booksellers who came, and here was the sketchbooks of Geoffrey Crayon, which they were all interested, of course, there were more modern first editions, and this thing went for like 10 bucks.
And I was able to, because I knew this was my friend's library, I was able to get it.
But I think you're also asking about, you never know, do you, John?
You're up there in North Worcester County and Central Massachusetts, and there's a yard sale.
An elderly woman has a box, among other items, out in her yard.
She has a box lot of 14 books, 12 of which are probably worth 25 cents, but marked $10 each.
Two of which are probably worth considerably more, also marked $10 each.
And I have to say, as a sport, I bought them all.
I think there were 20 books, because I gave them $200.
But the one, there were two in there, really, but of course, the
Emily Dickinson's first series, 18, was it 90 or 90, whatever it is, knowing instantly what it was, I have to say.
And then people have said to me, didn't you feel terrible doing that to that little old lady?
And I said, I paid her price.
I mean, really, we should discuss this at some point.
If the price is, I didn't try to beat her down, right?
And I bought everything that was in the box a lot, and I thought I was being a sport.
I think you were a great sport.
to buy the whole, really, right?
And whatever I didn't keep, I gave to the Goddard Library, and they probably sold them for two bucks at 50 cents each, and she was very happy with the $200.
The rule of thumb in the book trade is if they invite you to their house and ask you to give them what it's worth, you're honor-bound and obligated to give them your best shot, consistent with your rent and your budget and all that stuff.
On the other hand, if they put it out for a price, whether it's in a bookstore or yard sale, and I find it, it's mine.
I mean, there was a former track of smoke I told that story to, and he said, if you go to hell, that's going to be the reason.
We're going to hell.
We're all going.
There was a question over here.
Yes, sir.
A question for both of you.
What's the most unusual or valuable or strange thing you've ever found inserted in a book from a previous owner?
I don't have a book from.
Something.
He's asking what's the most valuable thing inserted in a book from a prior owner.
I can't say that I found anything other than I like books that have annotations in them.
Do you mean like a letter?
No, not for me.
No, I can't say that I have, actually.
I wish I could say.
I haven't found anything except in my own imagination.
I mean, nothing that I would wish that were there.
I did find a book one time with a heart drawn in it.
And the reason I mention this is because the book itself was not worth much of anything.
And somebody in 1901 or something had apparently secreted a
a secret message to his lover in this heart.
And there was a little note to that effect, and somebody had slit it with a razor and plucked the note out of it.
That's kind of intriguing.
Oh, that's pretty good.
But what it said, I don't know.
Probably said, they'll meet you down in Kentucky Fried Chicken.
No wonder you're not writing romance.
no wonder you're not writing romance I am writing romance I have to say when I hear a novelist say he got mad at a book scout and he says I'm going to write a novel and I'm going to kill him off I can't do that as a nonfiction writer I continually write about books and book culture and I was on a panel last year at the Miami Book Fair and Carolyn C was there she was talking about her father who had been a
a pornographer who wrote 70 pornographic novels under a pseudonym.
And I said, well, how the heck can I talk that?
So I did say, you know, the closest I will ever come to writing a love scene, I mean, here I am writing books about books.
And I do have a page in Among the Gently Red.
I checked it out this morning.
It's pages 69 and 70.
I said, this is it.
This is as close as I will ever come to writing a love scene in the book, where I talk about the tactility.
I mean, what is it about
the erotic qualities of, and I can't paraphrase it, don't ask me to, but I do know I read it
at the Miami Book Fair and I blushed.
And it was colorized.
It was on C-Span.
My wife said to me, you really shouldn't have done that.
Shouldn't have read that section very well.
What is it?
People say, what is it that drives you crazy about a book?
I mean, we feel it.
We smoke it.
We caress it.
We fill our lungs with the aroma.
I mean, we get dizzy.
We get weak meat.
So I am paraphrasing it.
to this day feel that way, because I still get review books, for instance, that come in the mail, and I'll see a big box from Yale, they do wonderful art books, or the Getty Center, they do, and I'll say, oh, and I'll open it up, and it'll be a beautiful book on El Greco or something, and you get that weak-kneed feeling.
Actually, you could write a book, a non-vision book, about a murderer.
But you would have to kill the guy.
Or hire some... You wouldn't have no motive for doing this, so that's pretty good.
You'd hire somebody who'd come and knock this guy off, just so you could write a book about it.
Wouldn't that be cool?
Be careful, he's from the Boston area.
Do you have one parting word you want to give everybody?
Because we're going to have to close it.
thank you for coming it's a wonderful time this is the greatest bookstore in the state today there's lots of books out there and if you look at something that you really wanted and you say that's too much money remember me with my graves of wrath too much money and now that's starting to look pretty good it goes up those kind of books that are 50 years old and dwindling the value keeps going up it doesn't go down
for what it's worth.
I want to say thank you to the dean of bibliophiles and to the dean of bibliophiles.